Starport blog tutorial and polling app (#349)
cosmos/sdk-tutorials: starport-blog/01-index.md

# Create posts

By following this beginner tutorial, you will end up with a simple blog app that is powered by the Cosmos SDK.

## Prerequisites

- A [recent version of Go](https://golang.org/doc/install) installed.
- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) installed.

## Getting Started

Let's get started! The first step is to [install the `starport](https://github.com/tendermint/starport) CLI tool.

After `starport` is installed, use it to create the initial app structure inside a directory named `blog`:

```
starport app github.com/example/blog
```

One of the main features of Starport is code generation. The command above has generated a directory structure with a working blockchain application. Starport can also add data types to your app with `starport type` command. To see it in action, follow the poll application tutorial. In this guide, however, we'll create those files manually to understand how it all works under the hood.

## Overview

> Let's take a quick look at what Starport has generated for us. `app/app.go` file imports and configures SDK modules and creates a constructor for our application that extends a [basic SDK application](https://docs.cosmos.network/master/core/baseapp.html) among other things. This app will use only a couple standard modules bundled with Cosmos SDK (including `auth` for dealing with accounts and `bank` for handling coin transfers) and one module (`x/blog`) that will contain custom functionality.

Reviewer: Might be worth linking to this doc https://docs.cosmos.network/master/basics/app-anatomy.html

> In `cmd` directory we have source files of two programs for interacting with our application: `blogd` can configure genesis and launch the app and `blogcli` contains commands to send transactions and start an HTTP API server.

Reviewer: `blogd` starts a full-node for your blockchian

`blogcli`  enables you to query the full-node, either to update the state by sending a transaction or to read it via a query

> This blog app will store data in a persistent key-value store. Similarly to most key-value stores, you can retrieve, delete, update, and loop through keys to obtain the values you are interested in.

Reviewer: link to https://docs.cosmos.network/master/core/store.html

    Use:   "create-post [title]",
    Short: "Creates a new post",
    Args:  cobra.ExactArgs(1),
    RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {
      cliCtx := context.NewCLIContext().WithCodec(cdc)
      inBuf := bufio.NewReader(cmd.InOrStdin())
      txBldr := auth.NewTxBuilderFromCLI(inBuf).WithTxEncoder(utils.GetTxEncoder(cdc))
      msg := types.NewMsgCreatePost(cliCtx.GetFromAddress(), args[0])
      err := msg.ValidateBasic()
      if err != nil {
        return err
      }
      return utils.GenerateOrBroadcastMsgs(cliCtx, txBldr, []sdk.Msg{msg})
    },
  }
}
```

The function above defines what happens when you run the `create-post` subcommand. `create-post` takes one argument `[title]`, creates a message `NewMsgCreatePost` (with title as `args[0]`) and broadcasts this message to be processed in your application.
This is a common pattern in the SDK: users make changes to the store by broadcasting messages. Both CLI commands and HTTP requests create messages that can be broadcasted in order for state transition to occur.

Let’s define `NewMsgCreatePost` in a new file you should create as `x/blog/types/MsgCreatePost.go`.

## x/blog/types/MsgCreatePost.go

> 

Reviewer: It's a bit weird to start a section with a code block. A short intro sentence would be nice

Reviewer: maybe just take the previous sentence and put it there

  return MsgCreatePost{
    Creator: creator,
    Title:   title,
    ID:      uuid.New().String(),
  }
}
```

`NewMsgCreatePost` is a constructor function that creates the `MsgCreatePost` message. The following five functions have to be defined to implement the `Msg` interface. They allow you to perform validation that doesn’t require access to the store (like checking for empty values), etc.

```go
// Route ...
func (msg MsgCreatePost) Route() string {
  return RouterKey
}
// Type ...
func (msg MsgCreatePost) Type() string {
  return "CreatePost"
}
// GetSigners ...
func (msg MsgCreatePost) GetSigners() []sdk.AccAddress {
  return []sdk.AccAddress{sdk.AccAddress(msg.Creator)}
}
// GetSignBytes ...
func (msg MsgCreatePost) GetSignBytes() []byte {
  bz := ModuleCdc.MustMarshalJSON(msg)
  return sdk.MustSortJSON(bz)
}
// ValidateBasic ...
func (msg MsgCreatePost) ValidateBasic() error {
  if msg.Creator.Empty() {
    return sdkerrors.Wrap(sdkerrors.ErrInvalidAddress, "creator can't be empty")
  }
  return nil
}
```

Going back to `GetCmdCreatePost` in `x/blog/client/cli/tx.go`, you'll see `MsgCreatePost` being created and broadcast with `GenerateOrBroadcastMsgs`.

> After being broadcast, the messages are processed by an important part of the SDK, called **handlers**.

Reviewer: part of the "application"

Reviewer: + link to https://docs.cosmos.network/master/building-modules/handler.html

## x/blog/handler.go

Begin by importing your new blog types that we created:

```go
import (
  // Existing imports...
  "github.com/example/blog/x/blog/types"
)
```

You should already have `func NewHandler` defined which lists all available handlers. Modify it to include a new function called `handleMsgCreatePost`.

```go
    switch msg := msg.(type) {
    case types.MsgCreatePost:
      return handleMsgCreatePost(ctx, k, msg)
    default:
```

Now let’s define `handleMsgCreatePost`:

```go
func handleMsgCreatePost(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, msg types.MsgCreatePost) (*sdk.Result, error) {
  var post = types.Post{
    Creator: msg.Creator,
    ID:      msg.ID,
    Title:   msg.Title,
  }
  k.CreatePost(ctx, post)
  return &sdk.Result{Events: ctx.EventManager().Events()}, nil
}
```

In this handler you create a `Post` object (post type was defined in the very first step). You populate the post object with creator and title from the message (`msg.Creator` and `msg.Title`) and use the unique ID that was generated in `tx.go` with `NewMsgCreatePost()` using `uuid.New().String()`.

> After creating a post object with creator, ID and title, the message handler calls `k.CreatePost(ctx, post)`. “k” stands for Keeper, an abstraction used by the SDK that writes data to the store. Let’s define the `CreatePost` keeper function.

Reviewer: link to https://docs.cosmos.network/master/building-modules/keeper.html

## x/blog/keeper/keeper.go

> 

Reviewer: Same as above, it's not good practice to start a section with a code block

# Create posts

By following this beginner tutorial, you will end up with a simple blog app that is powered by the Cosmos SDK.

## Prerequisites

> - A [recent version of Go](https://golang.org/doc/install) installed.

Reviewer 2: need to add node as a prerequisites

Author: Ok

## Getting Started

Let's get started! The first step is to install the `starport` CLI tool:

### NPM

```

> npm install -g @tendermint/starport

Reviewer 2: is this npm or brew or both?

Author: It's either. Yeah, I think link to a readme makes sense.

```

### Homebrew

```
brew install tendermint/tap/starport
```

Alternatively, Starport can be built [from source](http://github.com/tendermint/starport).

> After `starport` is installed, use it to create the initial app structure:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After `starport` is installed, use it to create the initial app structure inside a directory named `blog`:
```

Reviewer 3: can this be customized?

Posts in our key-value store will look like this:

```
"post-0bae9f7d-20f8-4b51-9d5c-af9103177d66": {
  "Creator": "cosmos18cd5t4msvp2lpuvh99rwglrmjrrw9qx5h3f3gz",
  "Title": "This is a post!",
  "ID": "0bae9f7d-20f8-4b51-9d5c-af9103177d66"
},
"post-8c6d8cd4-b4c9-4ba3-a683-e894db3f2605": {
  ...
}
```

Right now the store is empty. Let's figure out how to add posts.

With the Cosmos SDK, users can interact with your app with either a CLI (`blogcli`) or by sending HTTP requests. Let's define the CLI command first. Users should be able to type `blogcli tx blog create-post "This is a post!" --from=user1` to add a post to your store. The `create-post` subcommand hasn’t been defined yet--let’s do it now.

## x/blog/client/cli/tx.go

In the `import` block, make sure to import these six additional packages:

```go
import (
  // Existing imports...
  "bufio"
  "github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/client/context"
  "github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/x/auth"
  "github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/x/auth/client/utils"
  sdk "github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/types"
)
```

> This file already contains `func GetTxCmd` which defines custom `blogcli` commands. We will add the custom `create-post` command to our `blogcli` by first adding `GetCmdCreatePost`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This file already contains `func GetTxCmd` which defines custom `blogcli` commands. We will add the custom `create-post` command to our `blogcli` by first adding `GetCmdCreatePost` to `blogTxCmd`.
```

```go
  blogTxCmd.AddCommand(flags.PostCommands(
    GetCmdCreatePost(cdc),
  )...)
```

At the end of the file, let's define `GetCmdCreatePost` itself.

```go
func GetCmdCreatePost(cdc *codec.Codec) *cobra.Command {
  return &cobra.Command{
    Use:   "create-post [title]",
    Short: "Creates a new post",
    Args:  cobra.ExactArgs(1),
    RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {
      cliCtx := context.NewCLIContext().WithCodec(cdc)
      inBuf := bufio.NewReader(cmd.InOrStdin())
      txBldr := auth.NewTxBuilderFromCLI(inBuf).WithTxEncoder(utils.GetTxEncoder(cdc))
      msg := types.NewMsgCreatePost(cliCtx.GetFromAddress(), args[0])
      err := msg.ValidateBasic()
      if err != nil {
        return err
      }
      return utils.GenerateOrBroadcastMsgs(cliCtx, txBldr, []sdk.Msg{msg})
    },
  }
}
```

> The function above defines what happens when you run `create-post` subcommand. `create-post` takes one argument `[title]`, creates a message `NewMsgCreatePost` (with title as `args[0]`) and broadcasts this message.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The function above defines what happens when you run the `create-post` subcommand. `create-post` takes one argument `[title]`, creates a message `NewMsgCreatePost` (with title as `args[0]`) and broadcasts this message.
```

This is a common pattern in the SDK: users make changes to the store by broadcasting messages. Both CLI commands and HTTP requests create messages that can be broadcasted in order for state transition to occur.

> Let’s define `NewMsgCreatePost`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let’s define `NewMsgCreatePost` by creating a new file at `x/blog/types/MsgCreatePost.go`.
```

## x/blog/types/MsgCreatePost.go

```go
package types
import (
  sdk "github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/types"
  sdkerrors "github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/types/errors"
  "github.com/google/uuid"
)
var _ sdk.Msg = &MsgCreatePost{}
type MsgCreatePost struct {
  Creator sdk.AccAddress `json:"creator" yaml:"creator"`
  Title   string         `json:"title" yaml:"title"`
  ID      string         `json:"id" yaml:"id"`
}
```

Similarly to the post struct, `MsgCreatePost` contains creator and title properties. We don’t include ID property, because `MsgCreatePost` defines only the data we accept from the user—we will be generating ID automatically on the next step.

```go
// NewMsgCreatePost creates the `MsgCreatePost` message
func NewMsgCreatePost(creator sdk.AccAddress, title string) MsgCreatePost {
  return MsgCreatePost{
    Creator: creator,
    Title:   title,
    ID:      uuid.New().String(),
  }
}
```

> `NewMsgCreatePost` is a constructor function that creates `MsgCreatePost` message. The following five functions have to be defined to implement `Msg` interface. They allow you to perform validation that doesn’t require access to store (like checking for empty values), etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`NewMsgCreatePost` is a constructor function that creates the `MsgCreatePost` message. The following five functions have to be defined to implement the `Msg` interface. They allow you to perform validation that doesn’t require access to the store (like checking for empty values), etc.
```

```go
// Route ...
func (msg MsgCreatePost) Route() string {
  return RouterKey
}
// Type ...
func (msg MsgCreatePost) Type() string {
  return "CreatePost"
}
// GetSigners ...
func (msg MsgCreatePost) GetSigners() []sdk.AccAddress {
  return []sdk.AccAddress{sdk.AccAddress(msg.Creator)}
}
// GetSignBytes ...
func (msg MsgCreatePost) GetSignBytes() []byte {
  bz := ModuleCdc.MustMarshalJSON(msg)
  return sdk.MustSortJSON(bz)
}
// ValidateBasic ...
func (msg MsgCreatePost) ValidateBasic() error {
  if msg.Creator.Empty() {
    return sdkerrors.Wrap(sdkerrors.ErrInvalidAddress, "creator can't be empty")
  }
  return nil
}
```

> Going back to `GetCmdCreatePost`, you created a new `MsgCreatePost` message and broadcasted it with `GenerateOrBroadcastMsgs`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Going back to `GetCmdCreatePost` in `x/blog/client/cli/tx.go`, you'll see `MsgCreatePost` being created and broadcast with `GenerateOrBroadcastMsgs`.
```

> After being broadcasted, the messages are processed by handlers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After being broadcast, the messages are processed by an important part of the SDK, called **handlers**.
```

## x/blog/handler.go

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Begin by importing your new blog types that we created:
```

```go
import (
  // Existing imports...
  "github.com/example/blog/x/blog/types"
)
```

You should already have `func NewHandler` defined which lists all available handlers. Modify it to include a new function called `handleMsgCreatePost`.

```go
    switch msg := msg.(type) {

>     case MsgCreatePost:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    case types.MsgCreatePost:
```

      return handleMsgCreatePost(ctx, k, msg)
    default:
```

Now let’s define `handleMsgCreatePost`:

```go

> func handleMsgCreatePost(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, msg MsgCreatePost) (*sdk.Result, error) {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
func handleMsgCreatePost(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, msg types.MsgCreatePost) (*sdk.Result, error) {
```

  var post = types.Post{
    Creator: msg.Creator,
    ID:      msg.ID,
    Title:   msg.Title,
  }
  k.CreatePost(ctx, post)
  return &sdk.Result{Events: ctx.EventManager().Events()}, nil
}
```

> In this handler you create a `Post` object (post type was defined in the very first step). You populate the post object with creator and title from the message (`msg.Creator` and `msg.Title`) and generate a unique ID with `uuid.New().String()`. Make sure to add `"github.com/google/uuid"` to the import at the top of this file.

Reviewer 3: is `uuid.New()` deterministic?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this handler you create a `Post` object (post type was defined in the very first step). You populate the post object with creator and title from the message (`msg.Creator` and `msg.Title`) and use the unique ID that was generated in `tx.go` with `NewMsgCreatePost()` using `uuid.New().String()`.
```

Author: > is uuid.New() deterministic?

It is not, but it is used during message creation, so I didn't see a problem in that.

Reviewer 3: if it's created in message generation you're right there's no problem, but is there also a check happening to confirm uniqueness?

> After creating a post object with creator, ID and title, message handler calls `k.CreatePost(ctx, post)`. “k” stands for Keeper, an abstraction used by the SDK that writes data to the store. Let’s define `CreatePost` keeper function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After creating a post object with creator, ID and title, the message handler calls `k.CreatePost(ctx, post)`. “k” stands for Keeper, an abstraction used by the SDK that writes data to the store. Let’s define the `CreatePost` keeper function.
```

## x/blog/keeper/keeper.go

```go
func (k Keeper) CreatePost(ctx sdk.Context, post types.Post) {
  store := ctx.KVStore(k.storeKey)
  key := []byte(types.PostPrefix + post.ID)
  value := k.cdc.MustMarshalBinaryLengthPrefixed(post)
  store.Set(key, value)
}
```

> `CreatePost` creates a key by concatenating a post prefix with an ID. If you look back at how our store looks, you’ll notice keys have prefixes `post-0bae9f7d-20f8-4b51-9d5c-af9103177d66` in this case `post-` . The reason for this is you have one store, but you might want to keep different types of objects in it, like posts and users. Prefixing keys with `post-` and `user-` allows you to share one namespace between different types of objects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`CreatePost` creates a key by concatenating a post prefix with an ID. If you look back at how our store looks, you’ll notice keys have prefixes, which is why `post-0bae9f7d-20f8-4b51-9d5c-af9103177d66` contained the prefix `post-` . The reason for this is you have one store, but you might want to keep different types of objects in it, like posts and users. Prefixing keys with `post-` and `user-` allows you to share one storage space between different types of objects.
```

## x/blog/types/key.go

To define the post prefix add the following code:

```go
package types

const (
  // Other constants...
  // PostPrefix is used for keys in the KV store
  PostPrefix = "post-"
)
```

## x/blog/types/codec.go

Finally, `store.Set(key, value)` writes our post to the store.
Two last things to do is tell our encoder how our `MsgCreatePost` is converted to bytes.

```go
func RegisterCodec(cdc *codec.Codec) {
  cdc.RegisterConcrete(MsgCreatePost{}, "blog/CreatePost", nil)
}
```

> ## x/blog/alias.go

Reviewer 2: alias.go is no longer needed and not in the module spec. we can remove it from starport?

Author: Is there a doc I can read about this? Because alias.go is still in the Nameservice, so I figured it's still the best practice.

```go
var (
  // ...
  NewMsgCreatePost = types.NewMsgCreatePost
)
type (
  // ...
  MsgCreatePost = types.MsgCreatePost
)
```

## Launch

Now we are ready to build and start our app and create some posts.

To launch your application run:

```
starport serve
```

This command installs dependencies, builds and initializes the app, and runs servers. You can also do it manually:

1. `go mod tidy` cleans up dependencies.
2. `make` builds your app and creates two binaries in your go path: `blogd` and `blogcli`.
3. Initialization scripts in the `Makefile` removes data directories, configures your app and generates two accounts. By default your app stores data in your home directory in `~/.blogd` and `~/.blogcli`. The script removes them, so every time you have a clean state.
4. `blogd start` launches your app. After a couple of seconds you will see hashes of blocks being generated. Leave this terminal window open and open a new one.

Note: depending on your OS and firewall settings, you may have to accept a prompt asking if your application's binary (`blogd` in this case) can accept external connections.

Run the following command to create a post:

```sh

> blogcli tx blog create-post 'This is a post!" --from=user1

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
blogcli tx blog create-post "This is a post!" --from=user1
```

```

> “This is a post!” is a title for our post and `--from=user1` tells the program who is creating this post. `user1` is a label for your pair of keys used to sign the transaction, created by initialization script previously. Keys are stored in `~/.blogcli`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
“This is a post!” is a title for our post and `--from=user1` tells the program who is creating this post. `user1` is a label for your pair of keys used to sign the transaction, created by the initialization script located within the `/Makefile` previously. Keys are stored in `~/.blogcli`.
```

After running the command and confirming it, you will see an object with “txhash” property with a value like `CA1491B39384A4F29E568F62B156E0F2D0601507EF499CE1B8F3930BAFE7F03C`.

> To verify that the transaction has been processed, open a browser and visit the following URL (make sure to replace `CA14...` with the value of your txhash):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To verify that the transaction has been processed, open a browser and visit the following URL (make sure to replace `CA14...` with the value of your txhash but make sure to keep the `0x` prefix):
```

```
http://localhost:26657/tx?hash=0xCA1491B39384A4F29E568F62B156E0F2D0601507EF499CE1B8F3930BAFE7F03C
```

> Congratulations! You have just created and launched your custom blockhain and sent the first transaction.

Reviewer 3: I got this error:
```
error converting http params to arguments: invalid character 'D' looking for beginning of value
```

Reviewer 3: i see was missing the `0x`

> Congratulations! You have just created and launched your custom blockhain and sent the first transaction.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Congratulations! You have just created and launched your custom blockchain and sent the first transaction 🎉
```

> ## Errors

Reviewer 3: What is this section? a FAQ? Why is it here?

Author: It's a list of error that developers might encounter. If they do, finding answers online may prove challenging.
